---
title: "Halfway on exchange"
pubDate: 2026-03-08
author: Otto
tags: ["exchange studies"]
---

In the ending of my previous post, I reflected on what it felt like to be halfway through a one-month journey. Now, two months have passed since I arrived in Mataró, Barcelona. I'm close to reach another halfway point, this time within the first half of my six-month exchange. Living here has started to feel more settled and slowly feeling like I’m becoming part of the society here. The weeks go by fast and the weekly routine is mostly about going to campus, attending classes and working. After that, it’s back to the apartment for some sports or just relaxing.

Weekends are the time to explore. I found out that all train traffic in the Catalan area is free at the moment due to construction work and some irregularities in the schedules. What could be a better reason to travel around by rail? To mention a few places, one would be Blanes, the town where Costa Brava begins, with its steep rocky shores. Another city worth mentioning is Girona and its countryside vibe. Behind the city’s old buildings and walls, scenes from Game of Thrones were filmed. And of course, Barcelona itself, with its numerous alleys, boutiques and attractions, has been worth exploring.

The first term of my studies is ending soon, which means the end of the first half of my exchange. During the last half of this month, there will be exams and new courses will start. It has been interesting to learn and work on projects in topics such as finance and deep learning. These topics deserve blog posts of their own.

For the three-month exchangers, the journey is ending soon. Many of the friends I have just met are heading back to their home countries at the end of this month. It’s sad, but at the same time it has been a good reminder for me that this journey won’t last forever. While studying and working here takes most of my time, it’s better to keep exploring.
